hey guys so you might be wondering why
I'm stood outside at night in the
freezing cold here in Iceland well it's
all about this this guy yeah I know
there's not much happening right now
however a few nights ago we saw the most
incredible display of the aurora
borealis we did it was absolutely
amazing like someone was was painting in
the sky I did a video for the BBC earth
lab all about the science of what goes
on when you get the Northern Lights and
the dangers that it may signal yeah
however sadly there are no lights
tonight but I still really wanted to
talk to you about how these otherworldly
lights have had a bit of a profound
effect on human beings over the years
normally the Northern Lights are
confined to a ring around the North Pole
called the auroral oval which intersects
Iceland Scandinavia North America and
Canada as well as northerly part of
Siberian Russia the first written
account of the lights dates back to 2600
years bc in China but there's a thirty
thousand year old cave painting in the
South of France that may depict the
aurora and before the scientific
understanding that we now have was
available the different communities in
these isolated regions came up with
their own explanations for the mystical
lights in the sky and these have grown
into a diverse collection of myths and
legends here five of my favorites
first up here in Iceland the lights have
long been associated with childbirth it
was believed if the Northern Lights
appeared while a woman was in labor
their celestial presence would relieve
the pain of the delivery but there was a
catch because if the mum to be looked
directly at the Aurora
it was thought the child would be born
Restless shaky and cross-eyed but if the
aurora was a double-edged sword for the
Icelanders the nearby Sweden they
heralded only good news many Swedes
thought that the Northern Lights were a
gift from the gods providing light and
warmth from a volcano to the north some
thought they would herald a good harvest
in the coming year while in other parts
of the country communities thought that
the lights were the reflections are vast
show
of herring in the coastal waters one of
the ancient Swedish names for Aurora is
SIL blixt literally meaning herring
flash and so the appearance in the skies
would bode well for the fishermen
heading out for the daily catch
elsewhere in Europe though the curtains
of green lights were met with fear and
foreboding in southern france and italy
the aurora would have only been visible
very rarely during times of intense
solar activity - the people living there
the lights would have been a strange and
frightening sight and one that was
treated as a bad omen heralding the
outbreak of war plague or widespread
death some communities didn't think the
lights were portents or anything good or
bad but nevertheless tried to explain
what they saw with the mystical stories
from within their belief systems one of
the most dramatic is the belief held by
native communities in Finland that the
lights were caused by a celestial
firefox which around so fast across the
snow this tail kicked up sparks into the
night sky to shimmer in the aurora the
finnish word for the Northern Lights rev
on Thule literally means Firefox but
perhaps the most colorful myth and
certainly my favorite comes from the
Inuit tribes in the far north they
believed that the aurora was formed by
the spirits of their ancestors playing a
ball game with a walrus skull in place
of a ball much of the Inuit religion
revolves around spirits and skulls which
makes the idea slightly more
understandable but in a bizarre twist to
this legend the Nunavut people of
northern Canada saw the same ball game
in the Northern Lights only they thought
it was walrus spirits instead playing
with a human skull of course today we
understand the science behind the
Aurora's and can even estimate when they
might be particularly bright or extend
further south sadly that's not tonight
but that doesn't take away from the awe
and wonder they can inspire in people
and even now in our lives ruled by logic
and technology some of the old
superstitions holds
it's still considered unlucky to point
or whistle at the Northern Lights a
remnant of a Sami myth from finnish
lapland which said that if you whistle
under the lights spirits would swoop
down and whisk you away so perhaps all
of these tales and the omens and
superstitions that they carry with them
serve to reveal the enduring power of
stories and the unending wondered that
the mystical Aurora can instill in
people around the globe and throughout
history I'm just looking forward to
catching a glimpse for myself this
evening you never know and seeing which
of many myths and legends resonates with
me would be a Firefox shoal of fish I'm
just gonna have to wait Missy don't
forget to check out BBC Earth lab for
the science behind aurora and a reason
why some ancient people might have had
the right idea about them being a
portent for danger if you think that
you'd like to chase the Northern Lights
as a job then you're in luck we're
actually here in Iceland to launch the
BBC Earth presenter search 2018 it's an
amazing opportunity for a budding
presenter with a passion for science and
the natural world to join our BBC Earth
family check out this video to find out
more about how you can apply and don't
forget to watch more videos that we've
made about this incredible violent